Scientific Calculator Project - DevOps Pipeline Overview The Scientific
Calculator project demonstrates the implementation of a complete DevOps
pipeline. This project is centered around a scientific calculator
application developed in Java, with various mathematical functions such
as square root, factorial, logarithms, and more. The goal of this
project is to showcase the use of modern DevOps tools to automate the
build, testing, containerization, and deployment processes.

In this project, we leverage the following tools and technologies:

GitHub for source control management. Maven for building the Java
project. Jenkins for continuous integration (CI) and automation of the
pipeline. Docker for containerization of the application. Ansible for
automated configuration management and deployment. Ngrok to expose the
application hosted locally for external access. Each tool plays a
crucial role in streamlining the development and deployment process,
ensuring that the application is reliable, scalable, and easy to
maintain.

Tools and Technologies 1. GitHub (Version Control) GitHub is used as the
version control system for this project, where the entire codebase is
stored and managed. It allows multiple collaborators to work on the
project simultaneously and provides a centralized platform to track
changes, create branches, and manage versions of the code.

In this project, a GitHub repository was created to store the Java
source code for the scientific calculator. All changes made to the code
are committed and pushed to this repository. This ensures that the
entire history of the project is well-documented, and it makes the
process of collaboration easy and traceable.

2\. Maven (Build Automation) Maven is used as the build automation tool
for the project. It helps in managing project dependencies and
automating the compilation, testing, and packaging processes.

For this project:

Maven was configured to handle the compilation of the Java source code.
The project was structured as a Maven project, ensuring that all
dependencies are handled through a standardized pom.xml file. Maven was
also responsible for generating the final .jar file that contains the
calculator application, which is then deployed inside a Docker
container. 3. Jenkins (Continuous Integration) Jenkins is used for
continuous integration (CI) in this project. Jenkins automates the build
pipeline, enabling the integration of code changes from the GitHub
repository in a seamless, automated fashion.

The Jenkins pipeline was configured with several stages:

Checkout: Jenkins automatically pulls the latest code from the GitHub
repository whenever changes are detected. Build: The code is compiled
using Maven, and tests are executed to ensure the code is functioning
correctly. Docker Build: After the Maven build is successful, the
Jenkins pipeline automatically builds a Docker image that encapsulates
the application. Push to Docker Hub: The Docker image is pushed to
Docker Hub, making it available for deployment. This CI process ensures
that the application is always tested and packaged correctly with each
update, minimizing the risk of errors in production.

4\. Docker (Containerization) Docker is used to containerize the
scientific calculator application. Containerization ensures that the
application can be run consistently across different environments by
packaging the code along with all its dependencies into a Docker image.

For this project:

The scientific calculator was packaged into a Docker container, ensuring
it can run independently of the host system\'s specific configuration. A
Dockerfile was created, specifying the steps to build the image,
including installing dependencies and configuring the environment. The
resulting Docker image was pushed to Docker Hub, enabling easy sharing
and deployment of the application. By using Docker, we eliminate \"works
on my machine\" issues, ensuring that the application behaves the same
way in any environment that runs Docker.

5\. Ansible (Configuration Management and Deployment) Ansible is used in
this project for automating the deployment of the Docker container.
Ansible\'s role is to ensure that the scientific calculator application
can be deployed seamlessly across multiple environments without manual
intervention.

For this project:

An Ansible playbook was created to automate the process of pulling the
Docker image from Docker Hub and running the container on the target
machine. Ansible ensures that Docker is installed and running on the
host machine and automatically deploys the scientific calculator
application in a consistent manner. The playbook allows for easy scaling
of deployments, ensuring the application can be deployed to multiple
machines with minimal effort. This approach reduces manual steps in
deployment, ensuring consistency and reducing the risk of errors.

6\. Ngrok (Local Exposure) Ngrok is used in this project to expose the
locally hosted scientific calculator application to the internet. This
allows users or testers to access the application externally without
deploying it to a remote server.

Ngrok creates a secure tunnel to the locally running application,
providing a public URL that can be shared with external collaborators.
This is especially useful during the development and testing phase, as
it allows real-time feedback on a live instance of the calculator.

Project Workflow Development: The scientific calculator is developed
using Java, with various functions for mathematical calculations.
Version Control: The code is continuously pushed to GitHub, where
changes are tracked, and collaboration between developers is managed.
Build and Testing: Jenkins automatically pulls the latest code from
GitHub and runs a build using Maven. Unit tests are executed during this
stage to verify the correctness of the code. Containerization: Once the
build is successful, Jenkins triggers the Docker build process,
packaging the application into a Docker container. This container
includes all dependencies required to run the application. Push to
Docker Hub: The Docker image is pushed to Docker Hub, allowing it to be
easily shared and deployed. Deployment: Ansible automates the deployment
process by pulling the Docker image from Docker Hub and running it on
the target environment. Exposing the Application: Ngrok is used to
provide external access to the locally running containerized
application, making it accessible for testing and feedback. Setting Up
the Project To set up and run the scientific calculator application,
follow these steps:

Prerequisites: Install Git for source control management. Install Maven
to build the Java project. Install Jenkins to automate the CI process.
Install Docker to containerize the application. Install Ansible to
manage and automate the deployment process. Install Ngrok to expose the
application for external access. Workflow: Clone the repository from
GitHub to your local machine. Use Maven to build the project and
generate the .jar file. Use Jenkins to automate the build, test, and
Docker container creation process. Push the Docker image to Docker Hub.
Use Ansible to deploy the Docker container on a target machine. Use
Ngrok to expose the containerized application for external access.
Conclusion This project demonstrates how to effectively use modern
DevOps tools to automate the development, testing, containerization, and
deployment of a Java application. By integrating GitHub, Maven, Jenkins,
Docker, Ansible, and Ngrok, the entire pipeline from code commit to
deployment is automated, ensuring a faster, more reliable process with
minimal manual intervention. This approach ensures that the scientific
calculator application is scalable, maintainable, and easy to deploy
across multiple environments.

Future Enhancements Add more features to the scientific calculator, such
as advanced mathematical functions. Implement a more robust testing
framework to ensure the accuracy of complex calculations. Further
automate monitoring and logging with tools like ELK Stack (though this
is beyond the current project scope). Links GitHub Repository:
Scientific Calculator Docker Hub: Docker Image